# Artist’s Statement: The Socialist 

*[See Original Article](https://group5j8blog.wordpress.com/2016/02/10/artists-statement/)* *(Grade: A+)*

***Video URL: [https://youtu.be/UsYnsBoqBnw](https://youtu.be/UsYnsBoqBnw)***

Before high school, I have worked for the publicity department in the Communist Youth League for 3 years, where I received the “socialist art” education. Some older teachers clung to the Soviet tradition that art must serve a social cause, whereas others, like my teacher, believed that art is ultimately about people. I finally quit the organization, tired of politics, however, I started to view propaganda arts in a different way, not as brainwashing tools, but as a special medium of people’s emotions. Indeed these works are created to advocate certain political ideology, but I believe that if we can peel off the political meaning of it, we might discover something different underneath.

For this appropriative artwork I collected over 50 socialist propaganda posters from the Soviet Union, Nazi Germany, the PRC, North Korea from the 1930s to 21st century. These posters might be formulaic, but in order for the “artists” to make effective propaganda posters, people’s feelings must accurately captured in the paintings. In the original posters, the faces conveys a wide range of intense emotions: hope, enthusiasm, fury, disgust… Even when we look closely at these faces themselves independent of other contents, the variance in emotions is still obvious.

And therefore I decided to crop the faces from the posters and merge them by overlaying them using Photoshop. I carefully resized them and tried my best to make the eyes overlap, however due to the different shapes of the faces, different expressions and different perspectives of the drawing, I couldn’t manage to make the mouths overlap as well, which result in a blur in that area. The average face theory proves to be correct, magically and delightfully: I did nothing but stacking the images together and set their opacity to by 2%, but this simple operation transformed the weirdly shaped faces in the original paintings into a incredibly realistic one, which I haven’t expected.

My intention, however, was to remove the political message in the propaganda posters and instead focus on these people as individuals rather than a a part of the political cause. To do so, I purposefully took the faces out of the original context. Although everything I used in my artwork is borrowed from existing works, the meaning has been fundamentally altered.

By overlaying the faces, I eliminated the factors that are irrelevant and emphasized the nature of humanity itself as a mixture of good and evil. The new face seems rather vague in its emotions. This ambiguity, to some extent, is also a reflection of my complicated attitudes towards the history of socialism. Growing up with parents who actively participated in the 1989 student protests and experienced the nationwide crackdown, I am familiar with the cruelty of such social systems, however, I still find it difficult to convince myself that anything or anyone is intrinsically bad. As Lao Tzu said two thousands years ago, “Don’t ever underestimate your enemies, by which I mean thinking that they are evil.”

Instead, I tend to believe in that theory that underlying all the political fanaticism is the pursuit of a better world. For the Nazis it is the national revival after suffering from the unprecedented global depression that started in the US and then spread to Europe; for the Communists it is the dream of liberation of all people that have been suppressed by social hierarchy. Unfortunately, all the movements eventually betrayed their original intentions and resulted in unimaginable human right disaster, just as Friedrich Hayek saids, “The roads to hell is paved by good intentions.” This historical tragedy always remind me of the story in Star Wars: what turned Anakin Skywalker into Darth Vader is actually his fear of losing his lover, Padmé, and his attempt to save her. What I did in this appropriative artwork is trying to take off the mask of Darth Vader and reveal Anakin’s face underneath, even though it might be no longer recognizable (I’m not saying that I’m Luke. Or maybe I am?), and I hope that this could provoke a rethinking of what we usually perceive as evil.

The interpretation of this artwork, however, largely depend on the audience’s personal experience. My Communist teachers, for example, might see this as essentially a “non-coercive publicity (propaganda)”, whereas people who are hostile to socialism might either see this as glorifying the evil, or actually a satire of it. Although I refuse to take a stance on the political issue, different audiences might perceive the artwork differently. Interestingly, after most of the contents in the original posters are stripped away, the meaning of the image has in fact doubled due to the indirectness and uncertainty, and perhaps that’s greatest value of this artwork.
