# The Correlation Between Motor Skills And Cognitive Abilities
## Introduction
Can physical exercises make you smarter? According to Chapter 3 of our textbook (Schacter, 2009), a large number of studies in rats and other nonhuman animals indicates physical exercise can increase the number of synapses and even promote the development of new neurons in the hippocampus (Hillman, Erickson, & Kramer, 2008; van Praag, 2009). Besides the neural aspect, there is also a theory that exercises can improve cognitive performance by enhancing motor abilities. The proposal that there is a relationship between motor development and cognitive development is not new. For example, Piaget (1953) proposed that activity and sensorimotor experience are important for the emergence of cognitive ability; Bushnell and Boudreau (1993) suggested that motor development may act as a ‘control parameter’ for further development, in that some motor abilities may be a prerequisite for the acquisition or practice of other developmental functions such as perceptual or cognitive ability. Recently, there is a re-emerged debate around the possible relations between physical activity, physical fitness, motor coordination and cognitive social, and emotional development (Niederer et al., 2011). Here we will examine two studies that focused on this topic.
## I: Pre-School and School-aged Children (Piek, Dawson, Smith, & Gasson, 2008)
### Hypothesis
In this study, it was hypothesized that parent report measures of fine and gross motor development obtained from ages 4 months to 4 years will predict school age motor and cognitive development, accounting for chronological age, gestational age, and social-economic status.
### Variables and Measurements
The predictors in this study were fine motor performance and gross motor performance at childhood, and the outcome variable was cognitive performance at school age. Measures were taken between 4 and 48 months, followed by measures taken at school age between 6 and 12 years. Since the research is a correlational study, there were no independent variables. 
Fine Motor and Gross Motor Performance. The fine and gross motor subsections of the Ages and Stages Questionnaires (ASQ: Squires, Potter, & Bricker, 1995) were used to determine the fine and gross motor performance of the participants from 4 to 48 months of age. The ASQ is a developmental screening tool designed to be completed by parents or primary caregivers at intervals of 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 18, 20, 24, 30, 36, and 48 months. The fine motor and gross motor performance of 6–12 year olds was assessed using the McCarron assessment of neuromuscular development (MAND: McCarron, 1997), which consists of five fine motor and five gross motor tasks. The fine motor score is calculated by summing the five fine motor scaled scores and the gross motor score is calculated by summing the five gross motor scaled scores. 
Cognitive Performance. Assessment of cognitive development was conducted using the Australian language version of the Wechsler intelligence scale for children - fourth edition (WISC-IV: Wechsler, 2004). The WISC-IV consists of 15 subtests: comprehension, similarities, vocabulary, information and word reasoning, Coding and symbol search, cancellation, digit span, letter–number sequencing, arithmetic, block design, picture concepts, and matrix reasoning and picture completion.
### Results and Conclusions
The result indicates that gross motor information from childhood is a better predictor of school aged cognitive performance than prediction from childhood fine motor or cognitive information. When the impact of early gross motor development was examined in relation to different IQ indices, both working memory and processing speed were found to be predicted by the early gross motor trajectory information. 
## II: Elementary School Students (Lopes, Santos, Pereira, & Lopes, 2013)
### Hypothesis
In this study, it was hypothesized that the direct and objective indicators for academic achievement in elementary school children without intellectual disabilities, i.e. scores on standardized tests, is associated with gross motor coordination, accounting for potential confounders such as physical fitness, body composition or socio-economic status.
### Variables and Measurements
Two variables measured in this study were motor coordination and academic achievement in urban Portuguese children aged 9–12 years. Extraneous variables include cardiorespiratory fitness, body mass index, and socio-economic status, etc. Since the research is a correlational study, there were no independent variables. The predictor in this study was motor coordination and the outcome variable was academic achievement.
Academic Achievement. Academic achievement (AA) was assessed using the Portuguese Language and Mathematics National Exams that are mandatory for all 4th grade students. The exams were administered in May 2009 by two supervision teachers in the classroom. For each exam 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 points were attributed to scores of E, D, C, B, and A, respectively. An AA score was computed by summing the points attained for each of the exams. Participants were then categorized as having high AA (>8 points); middle AA (7–5 points); or lower AA (<4 points).
Motor Coordination. Motor coordination (MC) was evaluated with the body coordination test, Körperkoordination Test für Kinder (KTK: Kiphard & Schiling, 1974), developed for German children aged 5–15 years. The sum of the standardized scores for the four items in KTK provided the motor quotient. Using the motor quotient children were then categorized as having: MC disorders (<70 motor quotient); MC insufficiency (71 < motor quotient < 85); normal MC (86 < motor quotient < 115); good MC (115 < motor quotient < 130); or very good MC (131 < motor quotient < 145). 
Physical Fitness. Health-related components of physical fitness were evaluated using the Fitnessgram Test Battery, version 8.0 (Welk & Meredith, 2008). The five tests recommended in the Portuguese National Program (curl-up, push-up, trunk lift, shuttle-run, and the modified back saver sit-and-reach) were used in this study.
### Results and Conclusions
Children of both genders with MC insufficiency or MC disorders exhibited a higher probability of having low AA scores compared with those with normal motor coordination, after adjusting for cardiorespiratory fitness, body mass index, and socioeconomic status. The results also showed that boys had higher levels of gross motor coordination and better performance on cardiorespiratory fitness tests than girls.
## Strengths and Weaknesses
Both studies examined the correlations between motor abilities and and cognitive performances of school-aged children, but they differ in their approaches: Piek’s study is both cross-sectional and longitudinal whereas Lopes’ study is only cross-sectional. The strengths of Lopes’ study include the use of direct indicators of academic achievement, i.e. scores on standardized tests, and the inclusion of potential confounding factors such as socio-economic status and cardiorespiratory fitness. However, the sample in Lopes’ study is not representative of the general population and therefore the findings are not generalizable. Moreover, the data is derived from cross-sectional study, and therefore did not indicate causality. Compared to Lopes’ study, Piek’s study recognized the intraindividual as well as interindividual variations. Although the causality cannot be proven, Piek’s study provided more information on the direction of the association between motor abilities and cognitive abilities. Nonetheless, parent reports used in this study might not be an ideal assessment of children’s motor performance, since previous studies have found that parents may have difficulties in reporting their child’s abilities (Emond, Bell, and Heron, 2005).
## General Conclusions
From a theoretical perspective, both studies suggest a strong relationship between gross motor and school-aged cognitive development, which supports other researchers (e.g., Campos et al., 2000) who have argued that early locomotors experiences are an essential agent for developmental change, and should not be neglected when appropriate interventions are considered. 
## General Applicability
Understanding the relationship between motor skills and cognitive abilities is important for early identification of children with poor motor coordination and ensuring the appropriate assignment of resources as well as the implementation of educational programs to develop children’s physical abilities. Since motor skills play such an important role in academic performances, schools should provide more opportunities for children to engage in physical activities that promote a diversity of motor skills. Physical education lessons are ideal settings in which to develop children’s fundamental movement skills and increase physical activities and fitness, while also contributing to one of the primary missions of schools, i.e. the promotion of academic performance.
## References
1. Bushnell, E. W., & Boudreau, J. P. (1993). Motor development and the mind: The potential role of motor abilities as a determinant of aspects of perceptual development. Child Development, 64, 1005–1021.
2. Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M. A., Hubbard, E. M., Hertenstein, M. J., & Witherington, D. (2000). Travel broadens the mind. Infancy, 1, 149–219. 
3. Emond, A., Bell, C., & Heron, J. (2005). Using parental questionnaires to identify developmental delay. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 47, 646–648. 
4. Hillman, C. H., Erickson, K. I., & Kramer, A. F. (2008). Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on brain and cognition. Nature reviews neuroscience, 9(1), 58-65.
5. Kiphard, E. J., & Schiling, F. (1974). Körperkoordination Test für Kinder, KTK. Weinheim: Beltz Test Gmbh.
6. Lopes, L., Santos, R., Pereira, B., & Lopes, V. P. (2013). Associations between gross motor coordination and academic achievement in elementary school children. Human movement science, 32(1), 9-20.
7. McCarron, L. (1997). McCarron assessment of neuromuscular development: Fine and gross motor abilities (revised ed.). Dallas, TX: Common Market Press.
8. Niederer, I., Kriemler, S., Gut, J., Hartmann, T., Schindler, C., Barral, J., et al (2011). Relationship of aerobic fitness and motor skills with memory and attention in preschoolers (Ballabeina): A cross-sectional and longitudinal study. BMC Pediatrics, 11, 34. 
9. Piaget, J. (1953). The origin of the intelligence in the child. London: Routledge. 
10. Piek, J. P., Dawson, L., Smith, L. M., & Gasson, N. (2008). The role of early fine and gross motor development on later motor and cognitive ability. Human movement science, 27(5), 668-681.
11. Schacter, D. L., Gilbert, D. T., & Wegner, D. M. (2009). Introducing psychology. Macmillan.
12. Squires, J. K., Potter, L., & Bricker, D. (1995). The ages and stages questionnaire users guide. Baltimore: Brookes. 
13. Wechsler, D. (2004). WISC-IV integrated technical and interpretive manual. San Antonio, Texas: Harcourt Assessment.
14. Welk, G. J., & Meredith, M. D. (Eds.). (2008). Fitnessgram/activitygram reference guide (3rd ed. Dallas, TX: The Cooper Institute. 
