# Research Essay: Yellowface 

*[See Original Article](https://group5j8blog.wordpress.com/2016/03/31/yellowface/)* *(Grade: A+)*

In the last season of the TV show How I Met Your Mother, Marshall slapped Barney with the “Slap of a Million Exploding Suns” that he learned from three Chinese Kung Fu masters. The episode, which the producer called “a homage to Kung Fu movies”, caused an outcry in Asian-American communities because the three Chinese masters were actually played by Robin, Lily and Ted in the show – a typical yellowface performance. 

The show was not intended to ridicule Chinese people or culture, but the reactions from Asian-American audience were reasonable if we understand what yellowface implies historically. Yellow skin, slanted eyes and thin, long mustache on a Caucasian face has long been associated with the negative portrayal of Asians: From the evil Dr. Fu Manchu who craved to take over the world to Mr. Yunioshi, the clownish Japanese landlord in Breakfast at Tiffany’s, there is no lack of cunning, evil, mysterious or peculiar Asian characters that are created by yellowface throughout modern film history. 

These caricatures of Asian people resulted from the fear of and hostility towards Asians as potentially dangerous foreigners, but the victims were instead Asian-Americans who were already naturalized US citizens. “People’s attitudes toward Asian-American men have been heavily influenced by these portrayals of Asian men,” as Professor Eugene Franklin Wong puts it,”the hand-me-down potential of stereotypes, especially negative ones, can be activated by the presentation of motion pictures that were made years earlier.” [1] Although Asians in Far East have never been directly involved in American racism, they, in fact, shaped Americans’ impressions of Asian people through their virtual presence in the form of white actors’ mimicry.



As the film industry becomes globalized, Asians are having more direct influences on yellowface: In order to secure the lucrative Asian market, Western filmmakers are now more and more cautious about their portrayals of Asian people. For example, in Iron Man 3, although the Fu-Manchu-style super villain “Mandarin” was still played by British actor Ben Kingsley, the character was revised to be a non-Chinese terrorist so that the movie could sell in China. Not only has Yellow Peril stereotype become less common on screen, some movies even start to include Asian heroes. In Cloud Atlas (2012), Hae-Joo Chang, one of the main characters, was depicted as a fearless Korean commander who saved the messiah Sonmi-451 (also Korean) and led human race to freedom.

However, Asia’s increasing significance has in no way made yellowface obsolete. When Hae-Joo Chang, an uncommon Asian hero in Western movies, turned out to be played by Jim Sturgess, a white actor, in yellowface makeup, it was more than a disappointment to the Asian audience. Although cross-ethnic casting was used throughout the movie to convey a sense of reincarnation, the racial hierarchy implied in the scenes was conspicuous: All the expressionless female servants were portrayed by actual Asian actresses, whereas the only Asian hero, although appearing Asian, was completely white on the inside. Whether it was intended or not, the contrast between the Asian characters given to Asian actors/actresses and those given to white actors/actresses is glaring.

Asian people’s involvement might have improved the image of Asians on the silver screen, but it doesn’t change the situation fundamentally. Cloud Atlas is disturbing not because of any negative stereotypes like those commonly seen in earlier yellowface, but because of the lack of Asian actors in a movie in which one of the most important storylines actually took place in Asia. Yellowface in early 20th century Hollywood might still be justifiable due to the absense of Asian-American actors and actresses in the industry back then. However, this can no longer be an excuse today, when there are lots of Asian actors and actresses trying to enter the industry and yet Asians are still significantly underrepresented on screen. The problem of yellowface, therefore, is not whether Asians are portrayed positively or negatively by white actors and actresses, but the fact that non-Asian filmmakers could “grant themselves permission to determine what it means to be Asian while excluding the voices and faces of Asian actors.” [2] 

 
It is Hollywood’s colonization of the globe that brings on-screen racial discrimination to Asia, but yellowface itself and the white superiority behind it are nothing new to Asian people. White superiority, whether in the US or elsewhere, is ultimately the consequence of Europeans’ domination of the world since late 19th century. In fact, before yellowface was carried out on screen, it was already prevalent in European art such as Claude Monet’s painting La Japonaise (1876), Giacomo Puccini’s opera Madama Butterfly (1903) and Turandot (1924). Rather than an appreciation of Eastern culture, this trend of Orientalism, “developed by European imperial powers to rationalize colonialism, … granted to the white man a moral authority to invade foreign lands and peoples even when crass material exploitation belied its ‘civilizing mission.'” [3] During the age of colonization, Asians who suffered Europeans’ despotic power shared the same attitudes towards yellowface as Asian-Americans nowadays: When Puccini’s Turandot was first published in 1924, Republic Of China (1912-1949), which was still a semi-colony of European countries, banned the opera for its portrayal of China in a negative light. [4]

Today the colonialist mindset still persists in the realm of entertainment and art, for example, in Katy Perry’s geisha performance at 2013 American Music Awards, and in last year’s “Kimono Wednesday” event at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, an exhibition of La Japonaise where the audience could try on a replica of the kimono in the painting. However, the attitudes of Asians and Asian-Americans have already diverged. Asians, in fact, have become promoters of this controversial practice.

Outraged Japanese-Americans organized several protests that finally forced the MFA to cancel the “Kimono Wednesday” event, yet ironically, the same exhibitions achieved great success in museums in Tokyo, Kyoto, and the MFA’s sister museum in Nagoya. The kimonos in MFA exhibitions were commissioned by NHK, Japan’s national broadcasting corporation, and even Japanese officials seemed to sympathize with the museum. When asked about the protests, Jiro Usui, the Deputy Consul General of Japan in Boston, said: "We actually do not quite understand what their point of protest is. We tried to listen to those people who are protesting, but we think together with the MFA we should encourage that Japanese culture be appreciated in a positive way. [5]"

The situation in China is similar. In 1998, a slightly modified version of Turandot, directed by Yimou Zhang, was openly performed in the Forbidden City for the first time ever since the opera was written. As a yellowface performance, nothing has really changed: Even though the costumes were redesigned to be more authentic, “there was no escaping the fact that aside from the director, some assistants, and a host of extras, the production was comprised entirely of foreigners.”[6]  However, not only have Chinese people accepted the performance that was once considered extremely offensive, they have also reappropriated it. Since then there have been various adaptations of the opera, the most famous of which is Minglun Wei’s Sichuan Opera Chinese Princess Turandot. In 2009, the government of People’s Republic of China (1949-) even used Turandot as a theme in the celebration of its 60th anniversary.



As victims of racial discrimination, Asians’ celebration of yellowface seems rather paradoxical but still understandable. Just like in Nella Larsen’s novel Passing Clare Kendry forgoes her black identity and culture, passes as white and marries a racist white man for better social and economic opportunities, Asians are sacrificing the authenticity of their cultures and deliberately conforming to Western expectations in order to earn recognition, and consequently opportunities, in a West-dominated world. Unfortunately, this pragmatic approach of Asians to promote their own cultures has puts Asian-Americans in an awkward position: Now they are not only marginalized as Americans, but also unlikely to find any support from Asia, where their families and cultures originated, in their fight against yellowface.

Although yellowface is primarily an issue in the West where people of Asian descent are minorities, it is actually the majority of Asian people in the Far East that have shaped, transformed, and sometimes contributed to this cultural phenomenon that impacts people in both societies. Unfortunately, Asian people’s influence on yellowface, whether intended or unintended, has hardly made the situation any better.

### Works Cited: 

*[1] Kashiwabara, Amy. "Vanishing son: the appearance, disappearance, and assimilation of the Asian-American man in American mainstream media'." Political Science (1996). Web. 12 Mar. 2016*

*[2] Blay, Zeba. "Ethnic Cleansing: Colorblind Casting in Cloud Atlas." Hyperallergic. Hyperallergic, 21 October 2012. Web. 12 Mar. 2016 8*

*[3] Ling, L. H. M. "The Monster Within: What Fu Manchu And Hannibal Lecter Can Tell Us About." Positions 12.2 (2004): 377-400. Academic Search Complete. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.*

*[4] Grant, James. "Bringing Turandot Home." Opera News 63.2 (1998): 28. Academic Search Complete. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.*

*[5] Gay, Malcolm. "MFA backs down over kimono event in response to protests." BostonGlobe. Boston Globe, 07 July 2015. Web. 12 Mar.2016*

*[6] Melvin, Sheila, and Jindong Cai. "Turandot In China: Rejected, Reinterpreted, Reclaimed." Opera Quarterly 26.2/3 (2010): 486-492. Academic Search Complete. Web. 12 Mar. 2016.*
